---
title: "Understanding How Inconsistencies in ENS Normalization Facilitate Homoglyph Attacks"
speakers: Jianwei Huang
date: 2025-02-26
layout: post
---

**Speaker Bio:** Jianwei is a Ph.D. student in SUCCESS Lab in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at Texas A&M University. His research interests focus on System Security & Web Security. Besides that, he is active in finding vulnerabilities in various applications.

**Time:** 12:00pm - 1:00pm  
**Location:** PETR 214

**Abstract:** In recent years, the Ethereum Name Service (ENS) has garnered significant attention within the community for enabling the use of Unicode in domain names, thereby facilitating the inclusion of a wide array of character sets such as Greek, Cyrillic, Arabic, and Chinese. While this feature enhances the versatility and global accessibility of domain names, it concurrently introduces a substantial security vulnerability due to the presence of homoglyphs—characters that are visually similar to others across Unicode and ASCII sets. These similarities can be exploited in homoglyph attacks, posing a distinct threat to domain name integrity. This study investigates the prevalence and security implications of homoglyph domains within the ENS ecosystem, revealing that these domains present a more pronounced security concern compared to their counterparts in the traditional Domain Name System (DNS). Despite community efforts to counteract this issue through a normalization process prior to domain resolution, our analysis uncovers significant discrepancies in how the normalization processes are applied across various applications. This inconsistency could result in the same domain name being resolved to different addresses in different applications, underscoring a critical vulnerability. To systematically evaluate this inconsistency, we designed a tool for detecting application-level discrepancies in domain normalization process without requiring access to the application's source code. Our evaluation on hundreds of real-world Web3 applications identifies widespread deviations from established homoglyph mitigation practices, with more than 60% digital wallets and 80% dApps (decentralized applications) not able to produce consistent ENS resolving results, potentially impacting millions of users. This analysis underscores the urgent need for a standardized implementation of normalization processes to safeguard the integrity and security of ENS domains.

---

Please feel free to join us at 12:00pm every Wednesday. If you want to schedule a talk, email Ze Sheng at zesheng@tamu.edu. 