---
title: "Cyber-Physical Security Through the Lens of AI-Enabled Systems"
speakers: Dr. Zhiyuan Yu
date: 2025-10-21
layout: post
---

**Time:** 12:00pm - 1:00pm  
**Location:** PETR 414

**Abstract:** Cyber-physical systems (CPS), powered by emerging artificial intelligence (AI) technologies, have become integral to various critical domains such as the Internet of Things (IoTs), medical devices, and autonomous
 vehicles. A unique aspect of these systems lies in their interactions with the physical world, by perceiving environments through heterogeneous modalities (perception), processing digital data with intelligence algorithms (computing), and autonomously actuating
 controls that affect physical processes (actuation). While this intricate fusion of cyber and physical components has unlocked unprecedented capabilities, it has also introduced new security challenges. However, traditional security measures often fall short
 in addressing these multifaceted threats. Under this paradigm shift, I systematically explore and mitigate the threats inherent in AI-enabled cyber-physical systems. The research objectives are threefold: (1) investigating how the interplay of cyber and physical
 components opens up novel attack and defense vectors, (2) developing robust defense strategies grounded by physical laws and constraints, and (3) benchmarking and theoretically analyzing security trade-offs from algorithmic, system-level, and human-centric
 perspectives. By bridging the gap between cyber and physical domains, my research enhances the resilience and trustworthiness of modern CPS while retaining system efficiency and usability. 

**Speaker Bio:** Dr. Zhiyuan Yu is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) at Texas A&M University. His research lies at the intersection of security, AI, and cyber-physical systems, with a particular focus on securing AI-enabled systems that tightly couple sensing, decision-making, and actuation. He's especially interested in understanding and defending the complex interactions between the cyber and physical components in embodied AI, spanning domains like autonomous vehicles, medical imaging, and GenAI applications. His work has been recognized with the Distinguished Paper Award at USENIX Security 2024 and the Distinguished Artifact Award at USENIX Security 2023. One of his recent projects also won the 2024 Federal Trade Commission Voice Cloning Challenge, and he was named a Machine Learning and Systems Rising Star in 2024.
---

Please feel free to join us at 12:00pm every Tuesday. If you want to schedule a talk, email Ze Sheng at zesheng@tamu.edu.
